════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════
  PHASE 2 — EVENT-DRIVEN BACKTESTER
  What we built, why we built it this way, and what to notice
════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════


WHAT IS PHASE 2?
────────────────
Phase 1 proved that the 50/200-day MA crossover produces sane numbers.
Phase 2 asks a harder question:
    "Can we reproduce those exact numbers using a fundamentally different
     architecture — one that structurally cannot look ahead?"

The answer must be yes, and matching to floating-point tolerance is the
proof. Any discrepancy is a bug, and the process of finding that bug is
where the real learning happens.


THE FILES WE CREATED
─────────────────────

backtest/event_driven.py
    run(bars, signals, fee_bps) → pd.DataFrame

    The event-driven engine. Iterates one bar at a time and routes
    information through four event types, mirroring the architecture
    diagram in README.md:

        MarketEvent → SignalEvent → OrderEvent → FillEvent

    The public signature is identical to backtest/vectorized.run() so
    both engines are interchangeable at the call site.

tests/test_event_driven.py
    All tests from Phase 1 ported to the event-driven engine, plus
    the parity check: eight scenarios where both engines must agree
    within 1e-9 on every column.

main.py (updated)
    Added run_phase2(), which runs both engines side-by-side and
    prints [PASS] or [FAIL] for the parity check.


THE FOUR EVENTS
────────────────

1. MarketEvent
   Emitted once per bar. Contains the bar's close price and the
   close-to-close return vs the previous bar.

   In live trading this is emitted by the exchange WebSocket when a
   candle closes. In backtest it's emitted by iterating through the
   cached parquet file. The handler code is the same either way.

2. SignalEvent
   Emitted by a lookup into the pre-shifted signals array. Contains
   the target position: 1.0 = go long, 0.0 = go flat.

   The pre-shift mirrors the vectorized engine's signals.shift(1):
   the signal computed from close[T] cannot enter the portfolio until
   bar T+1. This is still an explicit enforcement in Phase 2. In
   Phase 3 (live feed), the lag becomes natural — the signal fires
   after the bar closes, and the order fires on the next bar.

3. OrderEvent
   Emitted by the Portfolio in response to a SignalEvent. Contains
   the delta: how much the position needs to change to reach the target.

   In Phase 2 the delta is always 0 or ±1 (binary position). In
   Phase 5 (risk hardening) the Portfolio will apply position limits
   and sizing rules before emitting the OrderEvent.

4. FillEvent
   Emitted by the Broker in response to an OrderEvent. Contains the
   actual filled delta and the fee charged.

   In Phase 2 the Broker fills every order immediately at the closing
   price with no slippage. In Phase 4 (testnet) the Broker component
   is replaced by the real exchange client, and the FillEvent is
   populated from the actual fill report. No other component changes.


THE BACKTEST/LIVE PARITY DESIGN
─────────────────────────────────
The event architecture is not just about preventing look-ahead. It is
the core of the system's North Star principle:

    Same strategy code runs unchanged in backtest and live.

In Phase 2 the data feed is a for-loop over parquet rows.
In Phase 3 the same MarketEvent will be emitted by a WebSocket handler.
The strategy, portfolio, and broker components below the engine never
know the difference.

This is the architectural payoff. Getting it right here means Phase 3
and Phase 4 are plumbing changes — the logic does not move.


HOW THE PARITY CHECK WORKS
───────────────────────────
Both engines receive the same bars and signals. The vectorized engine
computes results with numpy array operations. The event-driven engine
computes them one bar at a time in a Python loop.

If the implementations are correct, every column in both result
DataFrames should be identical to floating-point precision (< 1e-9
absolute error). The comparison is done in run_phase2() in main.py and
in test_parity_* tests in tests/test_event_driven.py.

A mismatch tells you exactly WHERE the bug is (which column diverges)
but not WHY. Debugging a parity failure is a valuable exercise:

    1. Find the first row where the columns diverge.
    2. Print both engines' intermediate values at that row
       (position, market_return, fee, etc.).
    3. Trace backward: which event handler produced the wrong value?

Common failure modes:
- Off-by-one in the initial position setup (first bar handling).
- Fee computed before vs after position update.
- Wrong direction of delta (target - current vs current - target).
- Equity compounded incorrectly (multiplying before vs after fee).


THE FIRST-BAR PROBLEM
──────────────────────
The most subtle part of Phase 2 is the first bar of bars_clean.

In the vectorized engine, after dropping warmup rows and calling
pct_change() and diff(), the first row of the result is NaN and gets
dropped. So the result effectively starts at the SECOND bar of bars_clean.

In the event-driven engine, we handle this by:
1. On the first bar: set portfolio.position = positions[first_bar],
   record prev_close, and continue (no row emitted).
2. On the second bar and beyond: emit events, compute returns, record rows.

The "silent" position assignment in step 1 matches what the vectorized
engine assumes: at the start of bar 2, the position was already signal[0].
No fee is charged for this initial assignment, which mirrors the vectorized
engine not including a fee for a zero-diff first row.

If this special case were handled wrong — say, portfolio.position stays at
0.0 on the first bar — the fee on the first real row would be wrong for any
case where signal[0] != 0.0.


KEY CONCEPTS TO UNDERSTAND
───────────────────────────

1. WHY EVENT-DRIVEN IF VECTORIZED WORKS?

   Correctness and extensibility. The vectorized engine produces right
   numbers but has no guard against look-ahead beyond programmer discipline.
   One missing .shift(1) anywhere in the signal chain breaks it silently.

   The event loop makes look-ahead impossible by construction: a bar T's
   close price literally does not exist in the system while the strategy
   is processing bar T-1. There is nothing to accidentally read.

2. WHY PRE-COMPUTE SIGNALS?

   Because the strategy's generate_signals() function is vectorized — it
   requires the full price history to compute moving averages correctly.
   Pre-computing and then slicing bar-by-bar is the simplest way to reuse
   the existing strategy code in an event loop.

   A class-based strategy with on_bar(bar) would compute the MA online
   using a running window (e.g., a deque of the last N closes). That
   design is more "pure" event-driven but requires rewriting the strategy.
   Phase 2 chooses the simpler path; Phase 3 will revisit this when the
   live feed arrives and online computation becomes necessary.

3. WHY DOES THE BROKER DO SO LITTLE?

   By design. The broker's job in backtest is to accept orders and return
   fills. No slippage, no partial fills, no latency. This is an
   intentionally optimistic model — real execution is worse.

   Keeping the broker thin now means Phase 4 (testnet) requires only
   replacing _Broker with a real exchange client. The portfolio and
   strategy components do not change.

4. WHY FOUR EVENTS AND NOT TWO?

   You could collapse this to "bar in → position out" with two events.
   The four-event design reflects the real execution pipeline:

       Market data (raw) → Strategy decision (signal) →
       Risk-adjusted order (order) → Confirmed execution (fill)

   Each boundary is a place where something real can fail, delay, or be
   modified. Phase 5 (risk hardening) will add position limits at the
   OrderEvent stage. Phase 4 adds async latency between OrderEvent and
   FillEvent. The seams are already there.


WHAT TO NOTICE IN THE OUTPUT
──────────────────────────────
When you run `python main.py`, Phase 2 should print:

    [PASS] Event-driven matches vectorized within 1e-9 on all columns.
           Rows compared : <N>

If you see [FAIL], read the column name and max_diff. Then:
    1. Add a print() inside the event loop to trace the first diverging row.
    2. Compare the event handler's arithmetic against vectorized.py line by line.
    3. Fix the bug and re-run.

The Phase 1 and Phase 2 metric tables should print identical numbers
(total return, Sharpe, drawdown, etc.) because they are computed from
the same net_return series.


QUESTIONS TO ASK YOURSELF
───────────────────────────
Before moving to Phase 3, make sure you can answer these:

1. If you removed the pre-shift and instead shifted inside the event loop,
   would the parity test still pass? Is there a way to introduce look-ahead
   even in the event-driven architecture?

2. In on_fill(), the position update happens BEFORE the return is computed:
       self.position += event.delta
       gross_return = self.position * market_return

   What would happen if you computed gross_return BEFORE updating position?
   Would the parity test catch this? (Try it.)

3. The broker fills at close price on the same bar the signal was generated.
   In reality you'd fill at the next bar's open. How would you modify the
   event loop to enforce next-open execution, and would that break the
   parity test?

4. The _Portfolio and _Broker classes hold no shared state. What does that
   mean for running two strategies simultaneously? What would need to change?


WHAT'S NEXT — PHASE 3
──────────────────────
Phase 3 connects the event loop to a live paper data feed via WebSocket.

The strategy and portfolio components are unchanged. The change is in
the data source: instead of a for-loop over parquet rows, a WebSocket
callback emits a MarketEvent every time a new candle closes on the exchange.

The critical test of Phase 3: a 24-hour paper run should produce a metrics
snapshot that is consistent (in direction and rough magnitude) with the
backtest over the same recent period.
